Virtual Dataset Concepts
========================

VirtData provides more than just a set of libraries and APIs.
The concepts are the starting point and foundation. The software
tools are built directly from the concepts. Having a strong
understanding of the concepts will enable you to get the
most out of virtual dataset.

This section contains some of the basic. As you go through the
chapter, more detailed explanations are given where appropriate.

### Procedural Generation

Procedural generation is a method of generating data by feeding
a stream of *random* or *pseudo-random* data into an algorithm. 
Usually, procedural generation aims to produce content which appears
original, not generated by an algorithm -- believable by some standard.

In VirtData, this takes the form of applying a layer of 
data mapping functions to a set of inputs called coordinates.

### Input Coordinates

In input coordinate is simply the logical address of a set
of data that a data mapping functioni can render. 
Input coordinate are often single scalar values. However,
for some functions, multiple values may be supported.

A single-valued input coordinate can be used, for example, to
describe a point on a time line. A coordinate pair may be used
to represent latitude and longitude.


### (Pseudo) Random Number Generators

Sequences of values produced by random number generators
(more properly called Pseudo-RNGs) are not actually random, even
though they may pass certain tests for randomness. Useful (P)RNGs
produce *apparently* random data that is completely deterministic. In 
practice, the combination of these two properties is quite valuable
for testing and data synthesis. Apparent randomness and determinism
(AKA repeatability in this context) are not mutually exclusive.

There *are* truely (effectively) random number generators available.
Assume that the term RNG in VirtData always refers to the common
*Pseudo*-RNG.

### Virtual Samples

Just as RNGs can appear random when the are not truly, statistical
distributions which take them as inputs work in the same way. By
feeding a uniform RNG over the unit interval [0,1.0] into a density
function, we can simulate random sampling (with replacement) over
an imagined population of entities, events, times, etc. This is a
common building block of realistic simulations, for video games
as well as database tests, and everything in between.

### Data Mapping Functions

The primary tool in the VirtData toolbox is the data mapping function.
It is simply a function that knows how to take an input and produce
a result that is meaningful to the user. VirtData makes it easy to
reuse data mapping functions in pre-assembled ways, thus acting as
a "recipe" for a virtual dataset.

The term *Data Mapping* is contrasted with the term *Data Generation*
, as explained further in
[Data Mapping Functions in Detail](./concepts/data_mapping.html).

